---
title: Let's take a few steps back
date: 2012-08-04
tags: [ movies, entrepreneurship ]
layout: post
nofooter: true
---

### Intro

It's been a while since I wrote my last blog post, but I haven't been slacking.
I've done a lot of coding - rolling new features on [http://movies.io](movies.io) almost
every other day. I've been doing a lot of talking, both on Twitter, on Facebook,
and by e-mail, with a variety of people.

And I've been doing a lot of thinking, too. Because what is worth the greatest
product in the world if there's no vision or purpose behind it? We've always
been in some sort of conundrum, Fred and I - what are we? Are we a rogue
website? I've been called a "mass predator" because I wrote software that is
good at finding information on the internet, and I designed an interface that
makes it easy to browse them. But we're not so evil, because we don't make any
money off of it (Which makes us, according to the trolls, "bad businessmen" - I
feel I've missed a cue, but let's move on.)

I've been following a few indie movie projects with a lot of interest lately.
So much that I even wrote [a blog post about it][4indies]. So much that I took
out some of my lunch money and took it onto myself to eat pasta just to help see
Hybrid Vigor, Invasion of the not quite dead, and The Selling succeed. (For the
record, Hybrid Vigor got over $57K, more than their goal, and are on their merry
way finishing the shooting in Latvia. Follow them [on twitter][hybridtw])

[4indies]: http://blog.movies.io/post/27574501603/4-indie-movies-worth-backing
[hybridtw]: https://twitter.com/HybridVigorFilm

As the clocks keep ticking, as [Roku expands to Germany and Spain][roku], as
[Netflix is having second thoughts about Europe][netflix], and [the first
feature film was released on Steam][steam].  As bills keep having to be paid,
and the initial excitement about movies.io quietly died down, it becomes harder
to motivate friends to hack up new features with me - I did the only logical
thing. I took a few step backs. And here's what I found.

[roku]: http://gigaom.com/video/roku-germany-spain/
[netflix]: http://gigaom.com/europe/former-lovefilm-boss-netflix-could-have-stormed-europe-years-ago/
[steam]: http://www.theverge.com/2012/5/25/3043020/indie-game-movie-steam-download

### What are movies made of?

A particularly fascinating debate has been spawned by Twitter's announcement
that it would [make life harder for 3rd-party clients][twitter3rd]. Dalton
Caldwell stepped up and put actions behind his [criticism of what Twitter is
becoming][twittercoulda]. His upcoming social platform app.net is [still open
for backing][appnet].

[twitter3rd]: http://allthingsd.com/20120801/the-future-of-twitters-platform-is-all-in-the-cards/
[twittercoulda]: http://daltoncaldwell.com/what-twitter-could-have-been
[appnet]: http://www.everythingisaremix.info/

With the ambitious goal and seemingly meek number of backers, I don't know if
app.net is going to reach is goal - but Dalton raises an important issue: when
you start thinking of your company as an entertainment company and not as a
service / tool, if your business model is ad-supported, your interests are no
longer aligned with those of your users.

And as soon as that happens, wtf-y decisions like "let's kill third-party
clients because it's hard to put ads on them" are a lot less wtf-y to upper
management. On a business level, and with a lot of added shortsightedness, it
*seems* to make sense. Just like taking down YouTube videos of popular artists
did - until Vevo was born, an unwilling cooperation, recognizing (way late) that
it was more of a blessing than a curse.

So let's recap: as a business owner, your interests need to be aligned with
those of your users/customers in order to provide the best service and not shoot
yourself in the foot. Creative work is a completely different endeavor though.
I'd argue that creation is at its finest when the creator writes, draws, plays,
shoots, edits, mixes stuff completely for its own selfish purpose, because he
enjoys doing it.

The greatest movies were made not because of financial motivation, but because
at some point, someone had a story to tell. And they went through thick and
thin, they fought their way to telling that story the way they wanted to.
Sometimes it means pissing off a whole lot of people. Sometimes it means making
less money than if you agreed to place a Coke ad, or making Keira Knightly and
Joseph Gordon-Levitt kiss.

You don't become a filmmaker because it earns a lot. You do it out of passion.
You get through all this shit so that you can write, produce, shoot, stuff that
you care about.

### Costs & revenues

We've established that passionate creatives would keep doing what they're doing
even if it didn't pay as much. That doesn't mean we can get away with the whole
money problem just yet. Even with all the determination in the world, a
production still has costs - you can only fake/borrow so much. At some point,
you gotta have cash to spend to make the magic happen. So that's a problem.

And when you're done producing your film, you have to distribute it. Is it
fast-foody enough to have the option to sell the rights to the big ones and go
through what we call mainstream channels?  Will you line up the cash for a
theatrical release? Release on iTunes? Or will you [pull a C.K.][ck]?  There are
many options, and all of them have costs - some cost money, others cost you
rights, pride or integrity. Are you willing to dumb down the cut to make it
PG-13 and have a larger revenue stream? Are you willing to sell out and have a
comedy trailer be cut out of your dramatic piece?

[ck]: http://popwatch.ew.com/2012/06/28/louis-ck-tickets-soldout/

Even if passionate people stand behind each good movie, the sheer numbers have
attracted greedy scumbags like a magnet over the years. And even for people who
mean well, things sometimes end up in [quite a mess][lonely]. That summary lets
loose a small recap of the indie distribution landscape right now:

> The independent distributors are far worse because they imitate the studios.
> Ladies and gentleman, if you don't have 20 million to spend on marketing then
> distributing a motion picture in an identical fashion, only smaller, isn't
> clever. It's shutting your brain off and flying on auto-pilot. We spoke to
> dozens of these companies and despite the volume of words escaping from their
> slick, capped teeth it's mostly blather.
> 
> To put it simply, we realized that we didn't want any of these companies
> distributing our movie because they didn't actually know how to do it. They
> knew how to hire other people to do it. They'd never stepped inside a
> projection booth. They didn't understand how long it takes to clean a movie
> theater between screenings. They'd never seen operated a concession stand. They
> didn't know how to do a media buy. They'd never printed a movie poster. They'd
> never physically stuck a screener in the mail and sent it to a critic. They'd
> never actually booked a movie screen on their own. They hired other people to
> do these things.
> 
> These other people had the skills. The distributors? They had shiny suits.
>
> *[The Past Six Months & The Road Ahead][lonely], Justin Eugene Evans*

[lonely]: https://www.facebook.com/notes/a-lonely-place-for-dying/the-past-six-months-the-road-ahead/359678007409730

Having read that, and having - sure as hell - never operated a projection booth
myself, nor printed a movie poster (although I'm working on fixing both points,
just out of interest), how could I continue blabbing around that I was on my way
to "fix movie distribution?". I couldn't. What I could do is take a few step
backs, analyze the situation, and see how I can apply my skillset to a
meaningful vision that would actually make a change. And I came up with a few
ideas.

### About ads

"The best minds of my generation are thinking about how to make people click
ads" says Hammerbacher, ex-Facebook. "That sucks", he adds. Which developer
could disagree with that? Ads used to serve a purpose - to solve the discovery
problem for products.  Before the age of the internet, billboards on the street
might have been useful to make you discover new products.

But in the age of the internet, that problem doesn't exist anymore. If you want
something, you'll find it. Ads are now trying to remind, no, manipulate you into
buying A rather than B. Worse still, advertisement has become a business folded
onto itself - you'll go to an ad-supported website and see an ad about... a
piece of software that can help you grow your own ad campaign. Even the AdBlock
guy puts up ads so he and his wife can go on vacation.

Trailers, once considered advertisements for movies, are now themselves
served with ads on the side, as if it was a privilege to watch a promotional
skit - and that you somehow had to pay for it. Trailers are also
country-restricted on YouTube, embeds are disabled - measure are taken so that
they are actually *harder* to spread.

I won't go further exposing the madness of ads, but I will go and analyze the
underlying premise of advertisements in the content business. In [Brett Gaylor's
RiP!: A Remix Manifesto][rip], the point is made that when the USA chose to
bet on intellectual property instead of manual labor, it was mistaken. Because,
especially in the young generations, many people feel that you cannot sell
something that is virtual. That trying to claim it is unethical.

[rip]: http://movies.io/m/FY/en

That debate is waste, and I won't end - or even start it here. Whatever your
opinion on the matter, the fact is: it's harder to make someone pay for
something he or she can duplicate perfectly at zero cost. Turns out, even
chasing people with a stick and beating checks out of them still doesn't work.
(Also known as subversing governments for your own interests, shutting down
filesharing websites, and [prosecuting citizens on dubious grounds][prosecute]),
even by doing all of that, still doesn't stop people from sharing things.

[prosecute]: http://torrentfreak.com/cyberlocker-offered-to-help-prosecute-users-to-settle-34-8m-copyright-suit-120706/

So if you can't force people to pay, what can you do? That's where advertisement
comes into play. If you can't force people to pay, you can force them to watch
stuff that gets you paid. For them, it's just a few seconds of their life wasted
on a product they either already use or will never use, but as long as there are
big enough fools to pay for advertising space, it works out for you, the
distributor. All that's left to do is pray that fools won't realize their
campaigns aren't exactly delivering as well as they thought they did. But shh.
Don't tell them that.

In short, ad-supported websites are based on the premise that people are too
cheap to pay for content. And that they're too dumb to realize that while
they're waiting for their episode to start playing on Hulu, they're actually
paying with their time for the content that they're watching. Talk about taking
your audience for idiots.

### The other side of the looking-glass

To top it off, advertisement-based businesses don't seem to be that much of 
a bane after all, as [the Facebook IPO disappointment shows][fbipo].

[fbipo]: http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/johncassidy/2012/05/inside-job-facebook-ipo-shows-system-is-broken.html

Meanwhile, everyday, indie projects are funded on Kickstarter. The huge
success of Steam sales, and the Humble Indie Bundle - and other countless
initiatives, go to show the contrary of the ad-supported premise: people are
willing to pay for what they love. A lot of money. Because among the swarm of
people that are too cheap or too lazy, there are a dedicated few that realize
the value and cost of what they consume, and who are willing to put their money
where their mouth is.

To me, kickstarter is truly one of the most disruptive and most important
companies of our epoch. Along with Twitter, which is - to me - as important as
the phone was in the 1880s, and YouTube, which played a role similar to Super-8
in the 1960s: giving a voice, and a score, back to the people. And that's
without counting today's hardware (ie. how your phone is more powerful than an
early day supercomputer). All these technology advances have definitely impacted
the way we do things, but was it always for the good?

We've talked about the costs of producing and distributing a movie. Kickstarter
definitely helps with covering the production costs, but indies are left with a
distribution problem and a discovery problem. Couldn't we put technology to good
use there too?

It is my belief that peer-to-peer is part of the solution to distribution. Like
VCR was before, or, before yet, the printing press, it is still seen as a threat
to traditional distribution, because it makes it easier and cheaper to
distribute content on a large scale. Well, fuck you, old-fashioned chaps! If you
can't find of a way to use it to your advantage, you simply haven't thought hard
enough yet.

I believe that within this technological era, we can solve both the production
costs, and the distribution+discovery problems, all by combining existing (and
very effective) tools. But for that, we need to lose a few of our misguided
thoughts. The first step is to admit that large-scale distribution is no longer
in the hands of a few entities. Anyone with a broadband connection can do it,
and in 2012, it's a lot of people. The second step is to admit that a billboard
is worth less than 200K Twitter followers. And the third step is to admit that
both of those are not good enough to ensure a good distribution of your movie.

When trying to come up with a solution to the challenges indie filmmakers face
today, I've tried to set myself up with a few constraints. The first one is,
don't try to screw anyone, or to assume they're stupid. It's too easy to try and
make indies believe in fairy tales and steal their content - let's not do that.
It's also too easy to fall back to an ad-supported model and go "me too". Let's
not do that either.

No, what should be done is the following: build upon peer-to-peer technologies
and social media to enable an even easier large-scale distribution of content,
*while* making it as easy as possible for people to support creators they
believe in, and to foster further creation (or story-telling, which is what
movies are really about).

### A dream's shadow

So there you have it, my new vision. Not everything is clear yet, but there are
a few differentiating ideas that I have in mind. I like to think that technology
should be considered in a larger scope: in the advancement that it provides
humanity with.

When you start thinking of technology as a tool to better collaborate as humans
towards a common goal - then your motivations, conclusions, and methods become
radically different. Radically different than when you're motivated by money and
fame.

Crazy idea number one: even in this virtual age, some things don't come for
free: computing power, bandwidth. Why couldn't seeding or donating a server for
a rendering farm be a form of payment? Giving up some of your resources (time,
part of what you already own like an internet connection) is a contribution that
helps everyone achieve their goal: help produce and spread great content. So, if
movies.io ever has a subscription model (still not sure whether it is a good
idea), people who donate part of their bandwidth by running a desktop client
that seeds could have discounted prices / stuff for free.

Crazy idea number two: copyright law has gotten out of hand, and it's been
holding back innovation and creation, whereas it was supposed to encourage that
and protect creators. It needs a kick in the butt - but stealing won't do. How
about applying open-source concepts to movie making? Movie producers could
release their finished movie, set a funding objective, and if it's reached, they
would release the source materials, free for everyone to sample from, and remix
to infinity. As more eloquent people have said before me,
[everything is a remix][remix]. We should really be embracing that instead of
fighting it.

[remix]: http://www.everythingisaremix.info/

I want to foster a community of creators, and let fans in on it. Find a
compromise that benefits to everyone, and not rob anyone or try to do things
behind their back. If enough people believe in it and we avoid the traps put in
place by the current jailers, it might just be crazy enough to work.

### Outro

There's a lot to be done, and I'm dedicated to spending a few years testing my
theories in that area. I'm not afraid to let those ideas on the internet,
because everybody else is busy optimizing ads.

If you're a movie studio, a producer, creative, or you just want to discuss
these ideas with me, feel free to hit me up by e-mail at <amos@movies.io>
anytime.

